Good point—this perspective makes the Stiefel manifold a lot more
intuitive. Here’s an updated version that frames it through projection
and frames of reference:

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Bridging diversity in perspective: the Stiefel Manifold

Dimensionality reduction has alwys been an interesting idea to me.

The Stiefel manifold is a collection of all possible ways to set up this
frame of reference with orthogonal projectors. Each point on the Stiefel
manifold represents a new “viewpoint,” or a new way of breaking down
data with an orthonormal frame.

More formally, the Stiefel manifold ( (p, n) ) is the space of all ( n p
) matrices with orthonormal columns, each acting as a projector into a
specific ( p )-dimensional subspace of ( ^n ). Special cases reveal its
character: when ( p = 1 ), ( (1, n) ) describes directions on a sphere,
while ( p = n ) represents the full orthogonal group, capturing all
possible orientations in ( ^n ). For values in between, it’s a
collection of partial projectors, giving you a restricted but
orthonormal way to see the data.

#### Navigating Between Frames of Reference

Now, here’s the challenge: you often want to move from one frame of
reference to another, preserving the orthogonal structure. This need
pops up across machine learning, data science, and physics, whether it’s
interpolating network weights, aligning rotations, or smoothly
transforming datasets. To switch from one projector to another smoothly,
we need a particular type of path—a geodesic. A geodesic gives the
“straightest” possible transition between two frames on the Stiefel
manifold.

To compute these paths, we bring in our two trusty tools: the **Cayley
transform** and the **logarithmic map**. These tools allow us to
calculate smooth paths while respecting the curved structure of the
manifold.

1.  **Cayley Transform:** This transform lets us construct orthogonal
    transformations from skew-symmetric matrices. Given a point ( X ) on
    ( (p, n) ), the Cayley transform can help generate paths that behave
    like “rotations” around ( X ), keeping the orthonormal structure
    stable. It’s our go-to tool when we want to create a structured,
    stable transformation.

2.  **Logarithmic Map:** To measure the initial “push” needed to move
    from one frame to another, the log map finds the tangent direction
    from ( X ) that points precisely toward ( Y ). Think of it as
    temporarily “flattening out” the manifold near ( X ) to get a
    straight-line view of ( Y ). It’s the starting direction for the
    geodesic that will connect ( X ) and ( Y ) in the shortest path on
    this curved space.

#### An Efficient Algorithm for Nearby Points

For frames that are close enough (and ideally well-aligned), we can
streamline geodesic computation using the Cayley transform and log map
in tandem. Here’s the basic recipe:

1.  Use the Cayley transform to approximate a smooth, rotational-like
    transition from ( X ) to ( Y ).
2.  Apply the log map to capture the initial velocity vector that points
    from ( X ) to ( Y ) on the manifold.

When ( X ) and ( Y ) meet the right conditions, this method reduces the
complexity of path computation to a few key matrix operations. It’s
efficient and particularly stable, a bit like finding a shortcut across
a landscape that would otherwise take many more steps.

#### Why Geodesics Matter

Geodesics on the Stiefel manifold allow us to navigate between different
projectors or frames of reference smoothly and optimally. They’re not
just mathematical artifacts—they’re tools for real-world problems. When
interpolating weights, aligning sensors, or smoothing trajectories in
data space, geodesics provide a principled way to keep each transition
short and consistent with the geometry of the data.

#### Wrapping It Up

Seeing the Stiefel manifold as a space of orthogonal projectors
transforms it from an abstract mathematical object to a concrete, useful
tool for navigating between perspectives. Using the Cayley transform and
log map, we can compute efficient geodesics—optimal, stable paths that
make transitions between frames of reference smooth and meaningful. So
next time you’re working with a dataset, think of each Stiefel point as
a new “lens” for your data, and consider the elegant geometry involved
in moving between them.
